---
paper: mahler
chapter: 3
title: 3. THE DATA SETS
topics: [baseball_analogy, data_analysis, risk_homogeneity]
key_formulas: []
---

> **TL;DR**
> - Two independent data sets: NL and AL baseball leagues, 8 teams each, 60 seasons (1901–1960).
> - Metric is losing percentage per team per season (~150 games each, roughly equal exposure).
> - Advantages over insurance data: constant set of risks, final accurate data, equal exposure per risk.
> - Provides a clean laboratory for illustrating credibility and experience rating concepts.

## 3. THE DATA SETS

This paper will examine two very similar sets of data in order to illustrate certain features of credibility. Each set of data is the won-lost record for a league of baseball teams.<sup>2</sup> One set is for the so-called National League while the other is for the American League.<sup>3</sup> Each set of data covers the sixty years from 1901 to 1960. During this period of time each league had eight teams.

For each year, called a season in baseball, for each team, we have the losing percentage, i.e., the percentage of its games that the individual team lost.

## *3.1 Advantages of this Data*

This example has a number of advantages not to be found using actual insurance data. First, over a very extended period of time there is a constant set of risks (teams). In insurance there are generally insureds who leave the data base and new ones that enter.

Second, the loss data over this extended period of time are readily available, accurate and final. In insurance the loss data are sometimes hard to compile or obtain and are subject to possible reporting errors and loss development.

Third, each of the teams in each year plays roughly the same number of games.<sup>4</sup> Thus the loss experience is generated by risks of roughly equal “size.” Thus, in this example, one need not consider the dependence of credibility on size of risk.

---

<sup>1</sup> Meyers [1] defines the efficiency of an experience rating plan as the reduction in expected squared error accomplished by the use of the plan. The higher the efficiency the smaller the expected squared error.

<sup>2</sup> Appendix A gives some relevant features of the sport of baseball.

<sup>3</sup> These two leagues are referred to as the major leagues. They generally contain the best players in North America. The data for the two leagues are independent of each other, since no inter-league games are included in the data.

<sup>4</sup> Over the 60 years in question, teams usually played about 150 games per year.

